# PHP Operators

[Documentation](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.operators.php) says about many operators.

An operator is something that takes one or more values (or expressions, in programming jargon) 
and yields another value (so that the construction itself becomes an expression).

Operators can be grouped according to the number of values they take: 

- Unary operators. They take only one value, for example ! (the logical not operator) or ++ (the increment operator). 
- Binary operators. They take two values, such as the familiar arithmetical operators + (plus) and - (minus), and the majority of PHP operators fall into this category.
- Ternary operator. It is `? :`, which takes three values. It is possible to leave out the middle part of the ternary operator. Expression `expr1 ?: expr3` returns `expr1` if `expr1` evaluates to true, and `expr3` otherwise.
    ```
    $action = 'show';
    echo $action ?: 'index'; // 'show'
    $action = '';
    echo $action ?: 'index'; // 'index'
    ```

## Arithmetic Operators

- `+$a` - Identity - Conversion of $a to int or float as appropriate.
    ```php
    $a = '12';
    var_dump(+$a); // (int) 12
    ```
- `$a % $b` - Modulo - Remainder of $a divided by $b. The result of the modulo operator % has the same sign as the dividend. 
    The result of $a % $b will have the same sign as $a.
    ```php
    echo 8 % 3; // 2
    echo -8 % 3; // -2
    ```
- `$a ** $b` - Exponentiation - Result of raising $a to the $b'th power.
    ```php
    echo 2 ** 3; // 8
    ```

## Assignment Operators

Assignment means that the left operand gets set to the value of the expression on the right.

```
$b = ($a = 2) + 3;
echo $a; // 2
echo $b; // 5
```

### Arithmetic Assignment Operators

- `$a *= $b` - `$a = $a * $b` - Multiplication
- `$a %= $b` - `$a = $a % $b` - Modulus
- `$a **= $b` - `$a = $a ** $b` - Exponentiation

### Other Assignment Operators

- `$a .= $b` - `$a = $a . $b` - String Concatenation
- `$a ??= $b` - `$a = $a ?? $b` - Null Coalesce

## Comparison Operators

- `$a == $b` - Equal - true if $a is equal to $b after type juggling.
- `$a === $b` - Identical - true if $a is equal to $b, and they are of the same type.
- `$a <=> $b` - Spaceship
    ```php
    echo 10 <=> 20; // - 1
    echo 20 <=> 10; // 1
    echo 10 <=> 10; // 0
    ```

## Error Control Operator

PHP supports one error control operator: the at sign (`@`). 
When prepended to an expression in PHP, any diagnostic error that might be generated by that expression will be suppressed.

## Execution Operator

PHP supports one execution operator: backticks. PHP will attempt to execute the contents of the backticks as a shell command; 
the output will be returned (i.e., it can be assigned to a variable). 
Use of the backtick operator is identical to `shell_exec()`.

```php
$out = `ls -la`;
echo '<pre>'.$out.'</pre>';
```

## Incrementing/Decrementing Operators

- `++$a` - Pre-increment. Increments $a by one, then returns $a.
- `$a++` - Post-increment. Returns $a, then increments $a by one.
- `--$a` - Pre-decrement. Decrements $a by one, then returns $a.
- `$a--` - Post-decrement. Returns $a, then decrements $a by one.

**Note**: The increment/decrement operators only affect numbers and strings. 
Arrays, objects, booleans and resources are not affected. Decrementing null values has no effect too, but incrementing them results in 1.

## Logical Operators

- `$a && $b` - And - true if both $a and $b are true.
- `$a || $b` - Or - true if either $a or $b is true.
- `! $a` - Not - true if $a is not true.
- `$a and $b` - And - true if both $a and $b are true.
- `$a or $b` - Or - true if either $a or $b is true.
- `$a xor $b` - Xor - true if either $a or $b is true, but not both.

## String Operators

- `$a . $b` - Concatenation operator - returns the concatenation of its right and left arguments
- `$a .= $b` - Concatenating assignment operator - appends the argument on the right side to the argument on the left side

## Array operators

- `$a + $b` - Union - Union of $a and $b.
- `$a == $b` - Equality - true if $a and $b have the same key/value pairs.
    ```php
    [1, 2] == ['1', 2]; // true
    ```
- `$a === $b` - Identity - true if $a and $b have the same key/value pairs in the same order and of the same types.
    ```php
    [1, 2] === ['1', 2]; // false
    ```
- `$a != $b` - Inequality - true if $a is not equal to $b.
- `$a <> $b` - Inequality - true if $a is not equal to $b.
    ```php
    [1, 2] != ['1', 2]; // false
    [1, 2] <> ['1', 2]; // false
    ```
- `$a !== $b` - Non-identity - true if $a is not identical to $b.
    ```php
    [1, 2] !== ['1', 2]; // true
    ```

### Union operator `+`

```php
// Example 1
$a = [1, 2];
$b = [2, 3, 4];
$res = $a + $b;
print_r($res);
/*
Array
(
    [0] => 1
    [1] => 2
    [2] => 4
)
*/

// Example 2
$default = ['safe' => true, 'dbname' => 'app'];
$result = $default + ['safe' => false, 'user' => 'root'];

print_r($result);
/*
Array
(
    [safe] => 1
    [dbname] => app
    [user] => root
)
*/
```

## Type Operator

```php
class Cat {};
$tom = new Cat();
var_dump($tom instanceof Cat); // true
```

## Splat operator (`...`)

```php
function add($a, $b) {
    return $a + $b;
}

$digits = [1, 2];

echo add(...$digits); // 3
```
